https://healthengine.com.au/info/basal-body-temperature-monitoring-contraceptive-method#:~:text=Basal%20body%20temperature%20monitoring%20is%2099%25%20effective%20in%20the%20first,(including%20during%20menstrual%20bleeding).


How does the basal body temperature monitoring method work?

The basal body temperature monitoring method works by enabling women to determine the fertile
and infertile periods of their menstrual cycle and avoid sex during the fertile stages.
A woman’s body temperature rises slightly after ovulation at about half way through her
menstrual cycle. After ovulation, progesterone levels decrease, which cause the woman’s
body temperature to rise slightly. A woman can therefore identify when ovulation has passed
and the fertile stage of her menstrual cycle has finished by monitoring her basal body
temperature throughout the menstrual cycle.

After the rise in temperature, she can be certain that she is infertile, until her menstrual
bleeding begins again. It is very important that the woman also avoid sex or use an alternative
method of contraception, from the first day of the menstrual cycle until a rise in basal body
temperature occurs. Because there is no temperature change to indicate the beginning of ovulation,
it is necessary for a woman to avoid sex without contraception, from the beginning of her menstrual
bleeding until her temperature drops.

Indications and contraindications

Women with conditions affecting their body temperature must therefore use an alternative form of
contraception or abstain from sexual intercourse until their body temperature stabilises.

Using the basal body temperature monitoring contraceptive method

Women may wish to take their partner to the GP or family planning clinic so that they can receive
information about the basal body temperature monitoring method from a health professional.
Women using the basal body temperature monitoring method should also ensure that they obtain an
alternative contraceptive method which they can use during the fertile stage of their menstrual cycle,
for example condoms or a diaphragm . Women using the basal body temperature monitoring method should
also be aware that taking emergency contraception following unprotected sex substantially reduces the
risk of pregnancy. Women who choose to use this method must also take care to learn how to monitor and
chart their basal body temperature correctly.