What is the rhythm method?
The rhythm method is a type of birth control.
The rhythm method is also called the fertility awareness method.
The rhythm method is not as effective at preventing pregnancy as
other methods, such as taking birth control pills ‒ it is only effective
about 76 percent of the time ‒ but it appeals to some women who do not
like the side effects that are possible with other options.

How does the rhythm method work?

Women using the rhythm method monitor their body and analyze their past
menstrual cycles to try to determine when their fertile days are. The most common
approach used on the rhythm method involves knowing how long their cycles
usually run, and then using that information to determine when they are fertile.
The rhythm method works best for women whose cycles are consistent because it is easier
to predict when she ovulates . Although eggs are only available for fertilization for
about 12 hours after being released from the ovaries, sperm can live in a women’s body
for a few days, so it is advised that women using the rhythm method avoid sexual
intercourse for three days before and after ovulation.

What is the biggest drawback to using the rhythm method?

Among 100 women in their first year of using the rhythm method,
24 will typically become pregnant.

What are the other downsides to the rhythm method?

Women have to think about these issues every time they want to have sex,
which many women find to be a burden. Also, the rhythm method provides
no protection against sexually transmitted diseases. The use of birth
control medications can give some women relief from pain during and
before their periods. Users of the rhythm method do not receive such benefits.

What are the benefits to using the rhythm method?

Since you will already likely have a very good idea about when you are
fertile each month, you will be prepared to know the best timing for
sex. Another major benefit is that you avoid the possible side effects
that can come with other methods, such as pills, patches, shots or implanted devices.

What are my other options for birth control?

There are many options available today for birth control. Options include condoms,
spermicide, diaphragms, sponge, or cervical cap. Combining these methods increases
their overall effectiveness. They free you up from having to think about birth control
for months or even years at a time, and can be removed if you want to become pregnant later in life.

When used correctly, long-acting contraceptives are about 99 percent effective.
Shots are about 94 percent effective and the pill, the patch, and the ring are about
91 percent effective. These procedures include tubal ligation or occlusion for women,
or a vasectomy for men. When these procedures are done correctly, they are nearly 100 percent effective.

The rhythm method is about 76 percent effective .

What if I realize I have made a mistake and
had unprotected sex during my fertile time?

If you are going to be using the rhythm method as your primary source of
birth control, you might want to ask your doctor ahead of time about the
best emergency conception option for you if a problem arises. Since many
women who use the rhythm method are doing so to avoid unwanted side effects
of other birth control types, knowing ahead of time about the potential side
effects of each of the types of emergency birth control will prepare you to
make a good decision if the time comes.

Reference: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/treatments/17900-rhythm-method
